Hey, guys. Welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
>> Thanks, Michael.
>> Hey.
>> Yeah, Fabio, Nicholas, Brett, it's really great to have you all here.
And I know you are all very excited about this topic.
Brett, I believe the last pre-COVID PyCon, we did a live on the expo floor show about WebAssembly.
- We did.
- Yeah, Fabio, we recently talked about PyScripts
and Nicholas, you're right in there as well,
working on WebAssembly, Pyodied, PyScripts stuff as well.
So I know a lot of people know all of you,
but maybe let's just kick it off
with a quick round of introductions and background,
not too deep since we've all done it before.
Brett, let's go with you first.
- Okay, keep it short.
I am the dev manager in charge of the Python experience
been a core developer for 19 years,
been on the Python steering Council since
Guido's retirement and I'll stop there.
Yeah. Fabio.
So I'm creative by script current.
Maintainer with Nicholas been working
with for an icon to four years now.
Right now I'm tech lead for for
and been doing a lot of community stuff
around Python for a long time as well.
- Yeah, fantastic.
PyScript was the big news out of PyCon last year.
That I think caught a lot of people by surprise
and people were very excited about that, including myself.
- Yeah, I'm very excited and yeah,
got a lot of attention for good and bad, right?
(both laughing)
- Well, it's gonna get some more attention today.
- Yeah, hopefully.
(laughing)
- Indeed, Nicholas, welcome.
- Hi, so yeah, I'm a colleague of Fabio's.
I'm a principal engineer on the PyScript team.
Prior to joining Anaconda in the summer,
I'd been a Pythonista for far too many years,
and I care to remember.
Before that, I was a teacher,
and before that, I was a classically trained musician.
And that probably explains my interest in Python
in education and the activities that I still do
in that sphere.
So that's me.
- That's fantastic.
You were involved with the BBC micro bit, right?
- Yes, I was involved with the BBC micro bit.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, that's awesome.
And we talked about that before.
Okay.
Well, let's talk about running Python in the browser.
There've been some attempts before
and those attempts are still used in different places.
I'm thinking of like Brython and Sculpt
and those types of things.
Anyone who has seen the birth and death of JavaScript,
that famous 15 minute talk,
which has gotta be one of the most hilarious
and yet insightful, like educational,
the foundations of the web and JavaScript
and what became WebAssembly talks of all time
is really great.
And I think those kind of land in that realm.
But since then, as we started,
WebAssembly has allowed us to bring real run times,
mostly things based on C or Rust,
but older things are based on C,
into the browser and run there.
So who wants to sort of introduce this whole idea
of WebAssembly quickly for those who don't necessarily know
and sort of set the stage
so people see where we're coming from?
- All right, I'll take it.
So you can kind of think of WebAssembly
as almost a portable CPU, right?
It's technically an instruction sets
that basically is almost like assembly designed
to just run anywhere.
It's all abstracted, it's technically stack-based,
much like CPython's interpreter,
for those of you who wanna know
insider baseball knowledge or insider football.
But that's basically it.
WebAssembly is really just a portable target
to compile stuff for that more or less
you make a runtime work for that target
and it gets run everywhere.
There's more details we can get into
in terms of WASM versus WASI and platform-specific stuff,
that the core base low level thing underpinning
all of our discussion today is WebAssembly,
which is basically just a portable CPU target.
- Yeah, okay, excellent.
And CPython, I guess as the name would very strongly
indicate, although people might not know,
is largely C at its core.
It's not Python code.
Some of the standard library is, but not,
you know, at the heart, there's an insane switch statement
- Wow, Luke, that is written in C.
And so that, if we can get that into WebAssembly,
then we can get Python, the runtime, into the browser.
- Correct.
Technically, as long as you can compile
whatever language you want to WebAssembly,
that's how we get it in.
And traditionally, the tool chains
that have supported compiling data WebAssembly,
either statically compiled languages
that use something like Clang as a build toolchain,
or which typically is fallen under C and C++, Rust,
because once again, Rust is based off of Clang
for their compiler.
As long as your language could use a toolchain
that already had this work to compile down to WebAssembly
as a CPU architecture or target,
you were able to get some WebAssembly.
So in CPython's case, because it's implemented,
The key parts are in C. That was able to be compiled down
such that I can run some WebAssembly.
Nicholas's work with MicroPython is the same.
MicroPython is written mostly, I believe, in C as well.
And so basically, that allowed both projects
to basically just use a specific compiler with specific flags
to just say, instead of writing out
x64 assembly for my AMD or Intel chip or your ARM
chip on your Mac, write me out some WebAssembly instead.
- People's first impression when they hear this is like,
oh my gosh, binary code executing the browser,
run for your life, right?
And it's really no different than JavaScript.
It has the same permissions and liabilities
and benefits of JavaScript, just different execution model.
Yeah.
- Yeah, it's the same soundbite.
- Fabio, yeah, Nicholas, anything else you wanna add
about WebAssembly to sort of set the stage here?
- I think, yeah, overall, that's the core.
There are a lot of nuances that comes with how it is.
It's taught, right?
One, it's still in a very young phase,
despite all the usage and acceleration,
everybody's excited about it.
But as Brett said, it's mainly a portable CPU
And it doesn't really come with the rest of what you would expect
from an operating system, and especially like file system and things like this.
So there's a lot of extra work that the larger community is trying to add now
to figure things out.
And...
Oh, sorry, go ahead.
- No, no, go for it, Fabio.
- No, and the other small detail that I wanted to add is, yes,
it's basically just like JavaScript on the browser.
with the exception that some APIs are not available.
For instance, access to DOM and other things like this.
Yeah, I was going to say, it's worth pointing out that
what Fabio was saying about it's not like having an operating system.
There are projects, you know, Brett mentioned Wazze,
there's also EndScript as well,
which gives you abstractions of a file system and so on and so forth,
such that you could,
And it's always important to be wary when a developer uses the word just but one could just compile
Python to wasm and it will just work in the browser. but of course to get that to happen
um, it takes, rather a lot of work and
Browser-based expertise to actually get you to for instance the uh python prompt, uh in a repl
As it were right
Which is why you know it wouldn't it be fun if there was some sort of project that got you to python in the browser
Without having to do all of that boilerplate stuff
Yeah, I wonder if we could find one of those, yeah
I I one of the things we spoke about before brett was
So much of what comes with python the batteries included the standard library
Assumes a slightly larger
execution environment than front end browser code, right?
Like it assumes a file system.
It assumes that you can probably open a network socket,
these types of things, right?
And so one of the challenges here is,
well, if you can compile it down,
that doesn't mean it's gonna be permitted to just
take some code and jam in a webpage and run it, right?
- Yeah, I mean, taking the CPU analogy, the next step,
Like when you compile something down to a CPU for like x64,
that's great, but how are you going to read a file system?
That doesn't exist to the concept of a CPU.
How do you make things show up on the screen?
How do you do lots of other things, right?
Like that's all implemented by your operating system, right?
It's the next layer above your CPU in terms of abstraction.
And WebAssembly only has the start of this concept
in one area, which is WASI,
and in another area, it kind of just leans hard
into the browser space,
and that's kind of what we call emscripten, right?
So generally the way all this plugs together is,
if you look at it from a browser perspective,
there's a tool called emscripten, E-M-scripten,
and it's basically a kind of compiler front end
that uses Clang to compile stuff to WebAssembly,
and then has a bunch of shims into the browser
to implement stuff like file access, as Nicholas pointed out
and all these other things you can get
in a rich web environment,
but it's provided by this project called Emscripten.
And it's not quite an OS, but it's not nothing either.
It's this interesting kind of middle ground
and it's project specific.
But then on the other side of all this,
there's a project called Wazzy.
And this is what, when you think of WebAssembly,
you start hearing people talking about this
compared to containers or edge compute
and all this kind of server scenarios,
where Wazzy acts like POSIX, right?
So it's not actually an implementation of an OS almost,
kind of like what Descriptan does,
but instead it's a actual abstraction
over what you might expect an OS to provide you.
So in Wazzy's case, for instance,
it doesn't implement file access,
it implements the function to call from WebAssembly
that gives you the file access.
So in that case, what you have is you have a runtime.
And that runtime is actually what provides
that level of OS that you need.
So if you've ever heard of things like Wasm Time
or Wasm Edge or Wasmr,
all of these are actually WASI run times
that basically load up your web assembly,
inject into that code the functions that WASI specifies
on how to read files or how to print a standard out
or read standard in,
and then allow them to run in an abstracted fashion.
So it's almost half between Emscripten and kind of an OS,
but above WebAssembly.
But as you can notice, it's a weird little split here
because there's the web part and the server part.
And this is where this whole discussion
gets really interesting, right?
Because it's now, we're starting to have discussions
about abstraction layers
and which abstraction layers are provided where.
And this is kind of where WebAssembly's youth,
to put it one way, really shines through
in terms of showing that it's all still very much
actively being developed, which I'm sure Fabio and Nicholas
have some very fun stories to tell you about
with PyScript and trying to get this all working today.
But this is where this whole OS concept kind of ties in,
where Wazzy's POSIX, just kind of abstractions
that someone has to provide.
And then you have tools like in scripting
that try to kind of specifically in the browser,
just go ahead and just lean hard in the browser specs
that the W3C has given us
and the browsers hopefully implement,
and just use those to implement those things
that you would expect from an OS.
So it is, as you said, an interesting problem
where from CPython's perspective
and most Python implementations, right?
Historically, we've had a full operating system.
MicroPython is going to be the exception,
which Nicholas, I'm sure we'll talk about.
But from a CPython perspective, PyPy, whatever,
we're used to running on Windows, Linux, Mac, right?
Like full operating systems.
- Might get jammed down into a tiny Raspberry Pi.
That doesn't happen anymore 'cause you can't buy them.
They're unattainable.
(laughing)
- But yeah, but I mean,
The key point is like a full OS, right?
Where we didn't have to concern ourselves
about what was or was not available.
But in a WebAssembly case, right?
Like in the browser, if you use Emscripten,
you only have available what Emscripten gives you.
In the Wazze case, you only have what's been standardized
by Wazze and that the runtime you choose to use
has actually implemented.
So we're in this interesting new kind of world
where what you might expect from the standard library,
for instance, in Python, that's always been there,
like threads, aren't necessarily there.
So it actually goes back to an interesting perspective
of what's Python the language
versus the runtime of Python that you're using
and what is provided by that.
We're kind of going back in time in a way
of kind of this clear separation
of language versus implementation
and kind of what does that mean to us as a community
and what's possible in this new space that is WebAssembly.
- It's very exciting and very fresh,
both meaning that in a good and bad way, right?
it reminds me a little bit of what happened with Node.js.
People are like, look, we're writing all this advanced code
and the browsers are getting really fast
at running JavaScript.
Like, no, no, they're not.
Similar to Apple Silicon, you're like,
you can't take a phone and make that your fastest computer.
No, no, and then somebody does,
you're like, wait a minute, look at this thing go.
Wow, you could have a server-side JavaScript,
which I don't necessarily wanna go touch,
but it's a similar transition
that like we could have Python in multiple places, right?
And it theoretically could run the WebAssembly version
on the server as well for parody
or I don't know if that makes any sense,
but you know, like it's sort of a similar transition
in ways maybe in the reverse direction than JavaScript,
but somewhat like that.
- It actually has, it's hard to predict
as you are living through things, right?
But thinking about how Python became popular
as most popular language
without actually having a solid story
for the most popular hardware today,
which is tablets or mobile,
like basically mobile phones and stuff.
And also not having a great story
for the most popular virtualization software around,
which is the browser, imagining how Python will change
with the Wasm stories, I find it very interesting
'cause it basically introduces a series of concepts
that we are not used to.
It's not just like run your environment there.
There's a whole packaging part of the process
that we need to think about
and how do we distribute that code?
And that opens up for things that we haven't been used to
around optimizing space and building effective
bundles of your environment,
where we can tree shake stuff
and all of those funny things.
So I think for Python,
it can be a very revolutionary moment
where in five years from now,
we're looking at a different ecosystem,
hopefully bigger and better.
I agree on this to sort of adapt and change and make the most of the opportunities that
that wasm presenters, but as
Brett and fabio have said it's a strange world in that it's not like i've got a libc and i know i'm going to be able
To get to the file system and things like that. There's
There there are these kind of shims and slightly different abstractions that
um
That may make python feel like it's uh
I was gonna say a duck out of water snake out of water. I don't know
You know what? I mean? It's not in its natural habitat water moccasin
but but it but it yeah, but it it
But I think I you know, i'm pretty confident and bullish about the python community and our ability collectively to find a way
forwards with this, um
You know, we've got a beautiful language. let's bring it to island
- We do, and many people love it.
And when people say I love Python,
they might mean the language,
but usually I think that's only a part of it, right?
Often that's the ecosystem and this whole broad, right?
All the packages and all the people on the projects.
And in that sense, like Python is very much empowered
to make some really cool transitions there.
We don't have to always kick it back to the core devs
for all the work.
[LAUGHTER]
Although, Brett, congratulations, I guess, on 3.11.
Right?
I mean, you guys--
Yeah.
That's a big deal.
I did a small amount, but thank you.
It seems to have been taken very well.
The community seems to have picked it up
faster than usual, which has been really fantastic.
Dependencies seem to have been ready for this
and got wheels out early, which was great
'cause it made transitioning a lot easier.
So kudos and thanks to the community
for putting in that effort to get stuff ready to go
as of October so that when things launched
and we were able to do that .0 release,
people were able to just install it, download packages
and have the wheels ready to go and pretty smoothly.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
Either you, other guys have any contributions to 3.11?
- No.
- Yeah.
- No, we are happy consumers.
- Yes, exactly, exactly.
All right, one other concept,
I really wanna quickly throw out there
and just get your thoughts on,
don't wanna go deep on this,
but one of the things that seems to me
like an interesting benefit for WebAssembly
is the interoperability with other languages.
Like WebAssembly can call WebAssembly,
so if somebody could compile their Rust or their C#
or their, you name it, over to WebAssembly,
you might be able to consume libraries in a broader way
than you can now in Python.
What do you think about this?
Yes, or is this just dreaming?
- I think the answer is you could,
but I also refer the honorable gentleman
to my esteemed colleague, Brett's earlier answer
about this being a relatively immature space as well.
I mean, to be honest with you,
I used to be a .NET developer before I came to Python.
And the fact that .NET has this notion of the CLR,
the common language runtime to which C#, C++,
visual basic, F sharp, I am Python,
I don't know, whatever compiles to,
it feels like it's a very similar space
as you're implying, Michael.
- The Blazor app actually is like incredibly near
what they're doing, which is,
I haven't done anything with it,
but it looks quite impressive.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, Nicholas.
So there's a piece of tech we can quickly touch here.
Is there's something-- and I think
it's actually on the page you're looking at right now
if you're watching the live stream.
It's right below the fold.
The important note, WASI is in transition.
The transition part is there is work
towards something called the component model, specifically
in WASI, which is defined more or less what you're
talking about, Michael, which honestly feels like Korba
for the new millennia.
to date myself or at least date my PhD supervisor
who did his PhD relating to Corbus.
- You said Corbus, right?
I have not thought about Corbus.
I have not thought about that since like the year 2000.
So, okay.
- Oh, aha.
But the thing here is the component model
is a spec being worked on that's meant to build
for you to specify at the WebAssembly level,
kind of the API that your WebAssembly code exports, right?
I mean, for the Python audience,
you can think of it as almost the CPython API, right?
is kind of like what does CPython export out
and then what can you use from your extension modules.
It's a similar thing,
except it's done at the WebAssembly level.
So you can just say like,
"Okay, this function will return a string."
And then there's a definition of what a string is
for WebAssembly.
So that when you say,
"Oh, internally, I might use UTF-16,
but a string in the WebAssembly component model context
is UTF-8."
So you have to encode out to UTF-8.
And the other side you go,
"Oh, hey, I'm gonna call this function.
Oh, it gives me a string.
that's going to come as UTF-8.
If you can keep using it that way, great.
If you have to change it to UTF-32 or something, you can.
But it's defining the seam of your WebAssembly module
and what it looks like in terms of what it exposes to other people.
So that's that big dream you mentioned of people writing stuff in other languages
that we can just consume directly from WebAssembly.
But there's obviously, as Nicholas pointed out,
immature stuff in this community where we have to figure out
How do we even expose that from the Python side, right?
Like I don't even know technologically what we would do
to make that work in terms of pulling
another WebAssembly module.
'Cause honestly, it's basically like linking,
but we don't have that concept of linking in Python.
You just run an import statement.
- There's no header, there's no definition
of what's on the other side.
- Exactly, right?
And that's exactly what the component model does, right?
It's an interesting position.
Actually credit to Peter Wang,
who you can save the love/hate toots to later
on this analogy, but up to this point, right?
A lot of the web assembly world has been these languages
that are compiled, right?
Like the C and C++ and the Rust stuff
like where you just pull in all your code,
you compile it and it all just kind of works.
And it's very much set up in these worlds where,
oh yeah, it's static compiled, whatever.
As you said, header files, it kind of comes together.
But we come from this world where people have poured
all this time and energy to wrap all of this esoteric C,
C++, Fortran even, code, and give us this nice API in Python.
But once again, Python doesn't operate like C and C++
and Rust and all these other statically compiled languages
where we have these concept of these interfaces
and they just load it, plug it right in,
and it just works.
Like, no, no, we're gonna import some Python code
and it's gonna execute as part of import, right?
Like, I don't know how people know that,
but literally the way import works
is it calls exec on your code, right?
Extension modules use some really crazy chips from glibc
to pull in that data off that module,
which we don't have in WebAssembly and stuff.
So there's a potential disconnect here at the moment.
And hopefully, as Fabio said, in five years time,
we can kind of work together to kind of work
with the WebAssembly community to make this a solved problem.
But as of right now,
that component model is not designed for us.
The Python community is designed more
for the C/C++ Rust world.
And we're probably gonna have to work with them
to try to figure out how to make that work with us.
Because to be frank, we're bleeding edge
in terms of a dynamic programming language
with an interpreter as we are coming into this
and not being a compiled language.
And I think we're going to be,
I don't wanna say bringing the WebAssembly world
kicking and screaming.
I think they're just not,
we haven't fully introduced ourselves yet.
And I think they're gonna come to get to know us
and we're gonna start bringing in some new stuff.
So I don't think we're quite ready for this whole magic,
bringing other WebAssembly stuff,
but hopefully we can work with them to make that happen.
because as of right now, it's not in the cards.
- Yeah, I'd like to make a comment on this one
'cause it actually is a topic of,
we have the running joke inside the PyScript team
where Antonio Cooney and I always argue about everything
or argue, discuss, and this is a big topic of discussion
because Antonio is more lower level
and very smart.
And I look at things more on the higher level side.
And I often tell, I really wanna see Python working
alongside with R or other languages for data science,
or just, I would love my kids to be using Python
to drive a gaming library in JavaScript on the browser
or something like this.
And he's like, it's never gonna work the way you want to
because you don't know how types are gonna be.
translated into WASM for different languages
and yada, yada, yada.
But one bridge that we have right now is JavaScript
and having proxy objects in JavaScript
that relates to Python on the browser or Rust or things
can be a possibility too.
But in general, I think we'll,
what I always end up saying is to Antonio is like,
We're kind of in creative mode right now,
or experimentation mode, where we can try stuff,
and maybe it's not the right way,
but it may work 90% of the time,
which gets a lot of work done for a lot of people.
In the meantime, we'll figure out the correct way
and how different languages will actually talk
to each other or what it means for Wasm.
Anyway, I think it's interesting.
This is such an interesting conversation on so many levels
because Brett mentioned Corba, which
is this thing from way back when, before I was ever
a software engineer.
And Fabio is talking about how he has a high-level view.
Antonio from PyPy has a very different perspective on this.
And I would say that--
And also fabio's pragmatism as well about what we need to get something to work because then we can do cool stuff with python
in the browser
and
Basically what i'm saying is that you need both of those attitudes the antonio and the fabio and bring them together because that's when
Interesting things happen. I'm not saying it's interesting watching these to have a
Interesting discussion in our morning stand-ups or whatever. What i'm talking about is that that's the intellectually
stimulating thing because you have two different perspectives.
And if like Fabio and Antonio are you, they're excellent
engineers, and they can see and empathize with what the other
person is talking about and adjust their position. And then
eventually, we kind of zone in on various potential solutions,
which kind of goes back to the Corba thing, which is why I
brought it up is that, you know, I remember meeting an old gray
beard programmer when I was a young whippersnapper, and he was
I can't remember, something had been announced. And I was like,
"Ah, this is amazing, it's gonna change the world
in that way young programmers have."
And he was like, "Oh yeah, we were doing this in the 70s
with punch cards or something like that."
And so once again, that sort of,
we have this cyclical nature in the history of programming
where we're coming back to these kind of archetypal
solutions implemented in different ways.
And you can actually see perhaps the whole
Waz and Wazzy thing as yet another iteration of this
because we're rethinking what a computing platform is.
It's this virtualized thing.
And it's taken us maybe 20 or 30 years
to get to that new space
after lots of different experiments.
We're still gonna be flapping around like headless chickens
trying to figure out how to make the damn thing work
because all of this stuff keeps moving on
and that's called progress, folks.
But this is why it's so interesting.
This is why I'm a software engineer.
It's because I get to work with clever people
on interesting problems that if we get it right,
a bunch of 11 year olds in the school down the road from me
are gonna be able to build Python applications
on a little device like this using PyScript.
And you know, that is something to work for.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
- And if you don't like the tools--
- A little device with the phone.
- Yes, it's our express.
By the way, we're not paying Nicholas
for every pitch on PyScript.
It's out of his heart.
He does an amazing job.
- Absolutely.
All right, well, let's, Nicholas,
let's go to you on this one.
Let's talk about a little bit about MicroPython.
You know, MicroPython is amazing.
I recently, sitting here at my desk,
stuck Velcroed to one of the posts of my desk
is one of these ESP feather 32s,
32 feathers, I don't know how, feather, I don't know.
Some order of those words.
Thank you.
Device, running Python, connected to my wifi,
seeking a bunch of stuff on the cloud
and just that little thing, it blinks every now and then
to tell me everything's cool.
It's doing its job and it just, these are amazing.
And yeah, I mean, I know CircuitPython
is not identical to MicroPython,
but they're very near and they've been
brought closer together as well, which is great.
So if we download the entire CPython runtime
over WebAssembly, it's not totally small, right?
- It's about 11 megs.
- Yeah, which we have fast computers,
but on the other hand, you wouldn't put it
like a public site that's there to load quick and be fast for SEO and all these things, right?
But you do have this project called MicroPython. Maybe tell us a bit about that. That's smaller,
right? Okay, so MicroPython is the wonderful creation of Damian George. Damian
is a physicist by training. He once told me what his PhD thesis title was, and it's something like
11 dimensional and then he lost me. Okay, but he was at Cambridge and one of his hobbies
or part of his background in his studies was working with robotics and he was part of the
Australia team that entered the Robo World Cup for Americans, that's soccer as it were,
And which is rather appropriate given the the the fact that the world cup in for human beings is happening right now
Um, but what he wants to do is write a scripting language so that they could very quickly update what was going on in these robots
Okay
And he learned a lot by doing that and then realized well
Actually, perhaps if I take the things that i've learned
building this stuff, uh to a
proper scripting language
Um, then that'd be a cool project. And so he looked around thinking well, what's
What are cool scripting languages and arrived at python?
uh
created a uh an early version of micropython put it on kickstarter thinking that he could sell a few boards
Make a little bit of money and you know micropython would be there. Well, I think a hundred thousand plus dollars later
and you know, uh lots and lots of uh orders for boards later, uh
Micropython has become this amazing success.
- Oh no, I caught the car moment, right?
The dog's like, "I caught the car, here we go."
(laughs)
- Yeah, well, yeah.
I think it rather surprised Damien, to say the least.
But now, Micropython is designed to run
in highly constrained environments.
So, for instance, I believe it can work
With only 16k of ram for instance clearly when you're running it on your board
Actual python is running on the flash memory rather than the ram which is something different. Um
And damien pulls an awful lot of tricks to actually make it work really efficiently
But because he's a physicist he knows how to do experiments and so that's what he does. literally he he
He tries to work out how can I get this big fat snake that's just eaten an elephant and squash it down into
this small space so that we can still have a full re-implementation of
Python 3 on something that maybe has 16k
Of ram, like I don't know a micro bit unsurprising. I have a box of micro bits on my yeah, beautiful
Yeah, okay and circuit python, uh is
is a friendly fork of MicroPython by the wonderful folk at Adafruit.
So, you know, it's...
I think it creates an interesting dynamic
because MicroPython is perhaps the industry version,
whereas CircuitPython, it provides a consistent API
for all the Adafruit boards, it's aimed at education,
they've got a whole bunch of tutorials and support for that sort of stuff,
and they're forever bringing out incredible new devices,
As i'm sure we've all picked up at pycon. you know the circuit playground express
Great conference band
um, so that's micropython in a nutshell, so
What's it doing on wasm?
Well, it's because 16 megabytes is rather a lot to try and download even today over a 4g network and these devices
Uh subtitles here. This is a phone i'm holding up. you know
Are underpowered compared to the rather beefy map book i'm sort of using to talk to you now
and so
Uh the one of the first things I did when I joined anaconda
Was just see well what happened if you run it on a mobile phone and it took 16 seconds to get to hello world
um, which
Not an optimal kind of solution so what would work and very quickly, you know, I I came to
uh playing around with micro python and micro python is you know under 100 milliseconds to start up and get you to
Hello world. It's fast enough and you've got
So here's the interesting thing i'm interested to hear what brett says here it's a full re-implementation of python 3
However, there are differences and so we get to brett's rather interesting angle of well
What is python in the abstract and in the actual detail of implementation?
Um, you've kind of got this platonic python
this ideal Python that doesn't actually exist,
and then you have all of these implementations,
of which, of course, the C,
the CPython version is the touchstone.
But MicroPython doesn't have all the APIs.
It doesn't have the full standard library,
and depending on the size of the device,
it might not even support floating point numbers,
for instance.
But it's Python.
It's the Python that we love.
You've still got indentation in the white space
that annoys the C developers or whatever, you know.
So it's good enough for me.
- So we can compile this much, much, much smaller,
more lightweight version to WebAssembly
and do similar things,
but instead of downloading a whole huge thing,
maybe it's a light little thing
that still lets us write Python
and do front end stuff in interesting ways.
- Yeah.
- All right, Brett, when I talked about speaking back
in 2019, I guess it was, in Cleveland.
We did touch on, well, if you're not
going to be able to do all the Python things,
how do you define a standard Python?
And way back in Greek philosophy,
in the platonic Python, if you will--
Platonic ideal.
--the ideal, the essence.
Yeah, I mean, you're a philosopher.
The essence, the core.
this is the little bit we circle and say,
oh, Python does this.
What is your thought on this micro invasion
of Python in the front end?
- Well, I have to be very clear on my bias here.
I'm somewhat notorious as having written the pep
that causes all accelerator modules written in C
for CPython to have to have a Python equivalent specifically
so that projects like MicroPython and PyPy
weren't left behind from the standard library
so that they could just work and not have to re-implement
the C API for key things like the date time module.
So I have a massive bias in this statement to be very clear.
So I am not representing necessarily the entire Python,
the core development team or the steering council on this,
but for me, it has always been a separate concept
of what the language is
and what the reference implementation is, right?
Like we may do development of the language
using the CPython reference implementation.
And I am very specifically using
term reference implementation as a way to help make the language evolve.
But for me personally, they are two separate concepts.
These happen to be developed simultaneously and by the same group.
And it's mainly for convenience and just be able to work faster.
But I do view them as separate things.
And it does make sense, right?
Like there are people on the Python core team who are way more into the esoteric
bits of the language spec and how the language functions.
and some people just care about the eval loop
that makes CPython run, the big switch statement
you mentioned earlier, Michael.
So for me, this is totally great.
We have versions of the language specified in the language spec,
which, to be fair, is not a spec from a ECMA
or ISO level standard, but hopefully good enough
for people to be able to follow to implement the language.
And to me, that is really what people are targeting.
I honestly, once again, major bias showing here,
I don't consider the standard library part of the language.
The standard library is a very key piece of functionality
and a key convenience and potential differentiator for Python in some people's eyes,
but I do not consider it part of the language.
It is just something that we have developed over the years
that has helped accelerate Python's growth
because back in the day, batteries had to be included
because guess what?
we didn't have PyPI. Like, Vaults of Parnassus had little animated GIFs of a website where you
downloaded zip files and you unzipped your stuff. Everyone vendored everything because there was no
installer. There was no pip, right? Like showing my age in the Python community, right? Like,
we had to do the batteries included thing to get people...
>> Did you un-UU encode it off of Usenet to get your package or...?
No, no, I was not that far back into programming that I mean I
use use that.
Don't get me wrong, but I was not coding at the
time.
Yeah, and use that was the way that it was
kind of just like it's wherever it ends up.
You grab it and you put it in your project
and you run with it right?
There wasn't a set exactly location.
Yeah, and so to me there is a very clear
separation here and I personally view the standard library as
a.
Thing that represents the time of when it was created,
To me, it has never been the language.
The language is what's in the language guide
and more or less what's built in.
And that's kind of it.
The import statement brings all this wonderful stuff in for you,
but that's not-- the import statement's part of the language,
but what you can import into it,
unless it's like Dunder Future,
which is baked into the language definition,
I don't consider that part of the language.
And I've said this controversially once
on the former website that we all used to hang out on before Mastodon,
where I actually said, like, the REPL, for instance, is not part of the language either,
technically, if you think about it. It's a wonderful tool, and don't get me wrong,
it definitely makes Python more useful, but for me, personally, the REPL is not part of
the language either. It's just something we all ship because it's so useful to use and
Python enables that kind of development process. But so, MicroPython saying it targets Python,
I believe technically 3.4 with extras.
Yeah, means it is a rough is an implementation of Python for Python 3.4 and that's great.
And whether it comes with everything that the standard library that CPython have for 3.4
is a positive is a plus what it has and but to me that's not the language.
And to me they're very clearly separate concepts.
It's just people get very spoiled when they just download CPython.
Well my code doesn't work over here.
It's like well you can use CPython almost as a platform.
and this platform just doesn't have the same platform.
The same language, just different platform.
And to me, that's fine.
That just is what it is.
- Okay. - That's it.
- So it sounds like you're okay with the micro invasion.
- Oh yeah.
I care about the language, right?
If CPython is the way you get it, fantastic.
If you get it some other way, that's also fantastic.
I personally care about the language.
And I mean, we all know the community
that comes with the language more than the implementation.
- And the fashion. - Right.
- Don't forget the fashion.
- And the fashion, yes.
That's it's a really good point
Sorry, go ahead
No, go ahead. I was gonna say that was a pre before we press record. That was a running joke, but
Bring us back to the serious conversation. Nicholas
All right, brett sandals. so the what the more serious point I was going to make is that
What brett just said is actually easy to miss but of vital importance
Which is if you're coding with say for example micropython
And you can't expect your code to work with CPython and vice versa
because of the differences in the wider platform ecosystem that you might have.
Mostly the behavior is the same, although there are some very subtle differences.
But yeah, it's mostly the experiments I've been doing where I've been using Pyedide
as the sort of the reference and MicroPython as the sort of the thing to compare.
I can just slot one in and slot the other out and pi script sits on top of it
And I I can make things work as I want to uh when i'm testing python things
There's a whole conversation which I think I can see coming down the tube right now about how do you interact with the dom?
and things like that we'll get to that when we get to it, but
um
It's mostly the same but folks should know that they are different. and well, there you go
I'm just flagging that. I need to flag that.
Yeah, absolutely. All right.
Quick question from the audience here is,
Claude says, do you think more stuff needs to be removed from CPython?
I mean, I know actually that was one of the things that the 3.11 release
addressed was a bunch of models were either removed or deprecated.
Before I think, Brett, we spoke about that
a year ago or something, maybe.
>> Yeah, Christian and I came on maybe, yeah, almost a year ago,
to the-- not the day, but maybe to the month or-- yeah,
October last year.
We came on here and talked about us removing modules
from the standard library.
Yeah, to directly talk about this, once again,
personally, not speaking on behalf of any other group,
I think we--
I am-- I've actually put myself back up for the Python
steering council.
And one of the things I put in my self-nomination
is I want to have a discussion about what the standard library is, right?
Which evolves around how do we want to evolve it, maintain it?
What would go in there today if we were to have guidelines?
Because we actually don't have guidelines on what should go in.
Historically, it's just been a core dev has gone, I want this in,
and people just kind of in general consensus go, okay.
Or honestly, I'm going to add this.
And they sometimes have added it because five or some odd core devs
all agreed to it and just kind of goes in,
and they just didn't think they have a wider discussion.
like not going to go down details on that one.
Anyway, point is, it's not had any guidance to it,
and it's a discussion I want to have.
And I don't know if it's going to lead to a shrinkage of the standard library,
just because, once again, from CPython perspective,
there's compatibility to consider, right?
And we don't want to just rip stuff out,
but it is possible we might start deprecating more stuff, right?
Beyond what the deb batteries were,
because the deb battery list was very conservative.
Basically, almost anyone brought up any objection to something,
we left it, whether we thought it was reasonable or not.
So I can very much see a future where we maybe have a list of,
like, yeah, this stuff's here, but don't really rely on it.
And obviously, MicroPython probably doesn't already ship that stuff now anyway.
But yeah, personally, I would love to see the standard library a bit smaller,
if for any other reason that it just makes it easier to maintain,
because there used to be before the dead battery pep,
more modules in their countries in the world.
So like I have a 198.
So there's a lot of stuff in there and we can probably stand to shrink.
And once again, it kind of makes it a little easier for
other projects to not get pushed back from people like,
well, where's this module?
It's in CPython.
It's like, well, we don't have it.
Well, why not?
It's like, if it's not there to begin with,
it makes their lives a little easier to not have to
try to support it and push back to people.
It's like, it just doesn't make sense for us as a platform.
Right.
And it was we talked about before.
came from some of these things being included came from a
different time. For sure.
I remember when I got rid of gopher live. So
also worth noting, but Archie, we're gonna keep we're sticking
with Archie. Sorry, go ahead.
I know. No, I was saying they those batteries have a cost. And
every time you have to run limited devices like micro Python
or the browser, like you realize that and then the question
becomes, well, is that user base significant to the Python project to make a change on
those, right? And that comes with conversation and evolution. So I think it's a problem.
It's always a trade-off. You say, let's remove TKinter because it's a GUI from the mid-90s
and nobody uses it. And then everybody points out that the turtle module mostly uses TKinter
teachers all over the world will scream, you know, and you've got a big problem. So, yeah,
it's a Gordonian knot.
Sure is. All right, let's bring in the third major project here, which we've touched on a
few times. But Fabio, tell us about PyScript. What a cool project.
- Cool, thank you. - Where does it fit in this
this Pyodine WebAssembly, MicroPython world?
What's the angle here?
- I think it fits as a glue.
Well, pretty much like Python was glue for a lot of things.
Like the concept of PyScript was really,
you know, realizing that a lot of,
most of the technology for Python to run the browser
is there and it's been there for years now.
And what we're missing is the easiness
to just use it without being,
without having to spend hours or days looking
for how to import things on our,
or the JavaScript side of it,
what it means on the browser,
on the, as a web dev to start using Python.
So the idea was really like--
- It's one thing to have WebAssembly,
sorry, it's one thing to have WebAssembly,
Python. It's another to build meaningful things in the browser with that as a piece, right? And so
PyScript kind of gives you a framework to write Python code in the browser
based on this WebAssembly, right? Correct. Nicholas, you want to say?
Yeah, it's not a framework. It's a platform. And we fully expect people to write
Pythonic frameworks on the platform that is PyScript to do whatever funky stuff they want
They want to do in the browser.
That's their business.
And I know that I trust the Python community will come up
with something that we can't even begin to imagine now.
But the thing to do is remember that PyScript
is that sort of platform layer rather than a framework.
But in that platform, what we're looking at
is perhaps pluggable runtimes and a bare minimum of APIs
and heuristics and ways of working
such that you can start to build your frameworks
on top of this and make the funky stuff,
Michael, like you said, that's useful for folks.
- Well, okay.
Well, so we might have Pyodide,
which is a more full featured version.
Might we have MicroPython for a fast, speedy version?
- Yeah, and there are other projects as well
that are coming up and, or other languages too, right?
- Yeah.
Hmm, so this is definitely in the--
- Would not be interesting.
- Exactly.
- There was a big announcement that got thrown in here.
We'll go this way.
We'll go with Simon Wilson,
who was on the previous show about Mastodon,
previous episode.
And he has a toot, which by the way, I don't know, Brett,
you said toot as well earlier,
But they just, the button on there used to say toot
until like last week, they just call it publish now.
I think they're downplaying the toot,
but it's gonna live on.
The toot said huge Python WebAssembly news tucked away
in this post from Anaconda here.
When you apply MicroPython to Wasm
and its default configuration,
something new and exciting emerges
with a total size of 300 kilobytes.
This new runtime loads instantly
and starts executing MicroPython logic
in less than 100 milliseconds.
That means the cost of running MicroPython on the web
is now equivalent to serving up a large image.
This is awesome, you guys.
Where are we going with this?
- Well, whenever you meet Damien,
you buy him a beer is pretty much what I would suggest.
Although not too many.
- Although it's unfair.
- You want him sober.
(laughing)
- Yeah, this is fantastic.
Because if we do have a really small runtime,
then all of a sudden you could.
So when people saw PyScript Fabio, they're like,
"Oh my gosh, could we replace JavaScript with Python?"
And the answer was sometimes, but not in general, right?
- Yeah.
- Not practically.
- This is, Paul Everett, who's been around
the Python ecosystem for a lifetime and is really great.
And we were talking about that
and Python for web during PyCon.
And he often comes up with this distinction
between the app web versus the content web,
where in terms of content web,
you need things to load immediately,
and you're mostly wanting to show content
rather than a full blown application.
And I think he still thinks
Python is not gonna be a reality for the content web.
I think this brings it really, really, really close.
And you can have basically Python running for content,
but also the amount of possibilities around education,
around exploration, real time and stuff like this
is tremendous.
And if we can actually, as a community,
gather and understand how we wanna build layers
on top of other things,
I think we can come up with really interesting solutions.
And let me explain, like,
MicroPython for instance,
doesn't have a JavaScript interface, right?
So if we could have a module,
maybe it's the Pyodide one that we strip out,
or we develop a new one where we can explore
that Python to JavaScript interface
and make it available for all the interpreters.
And it's just like a package and you can install it.
we open up a new channel,
and or the whole packaging story for Python on the browser.
And if we can figure that out in a way that,
we can just install packages
and doesn't matter the interpreter
because it all ended up like being Wasm.
Then I think we can build a very strong ecosystem
where if you need more complicated things,
you run with your full CPython and Wasm.
interpreter, otherwise you can just use micro Python.
But I think right now is the time
where we start doing those things.
- Coming from the Anaconda world,
there's one view of like,
what does Python computation mean, right?
Often that means kind of notebooks and data science
and like scientific computing.
And there's a big desire to sort of move that
to the front end and just say,
let people run that on their computers
and they can do kind of like notebook things
on the front end.
But there's a whole other side of the web that says,
I wanna build Gmail, but not in JavaScript on the front end,
but I want that interactivity or I want maps
or I want most modern highlight dynamic,
single page app type of web apps,
but I wanna write that in Python.
Those, that to me feels like
that's almost the dividing point of like,
well, we want the Pyodide runtime where it's rich
and we can just straight grab matplotlib
and run with it or pandas
versus I'm willing to give up a lot
to not write JavaScript.
You know what I mean?
If I've got to only use a few packages
and I could still write Python end to end,
that makes me super happy.
- Right.
And as you said,
like we can augment the things that Python can do.
Like if we all of a sudden have access to the browser APIs
for geolocation or other things,
then you can write very interesting applications
that is just Python or, you know,
even a mobile and stuff like this,
'cause WebAssembly can run on mobile as well.
So yeah, the competition between that,
all the arguments framing PyScript versus JavaScript,
I think they really missed the point where it is,
it is augmenting both ecosystems, right?
Right now, we now can use D3 in Python and vice versa.
JavaScript developers can use NumPy or pandas.
It's a win-win to be honest.
- Yeah, one of the things I think maybe people
when they hear this don't necessarily know,
and I forget which is maybe the best one to look at,
but not only can you run Python code in the browser
with PyScript, but you can hook JavaScript events
and then you can change DOM elements.
This was the JavaScript DOM interaction layer
you were talking about before, right?
- Yeah, yes.
And actually to what Nicholas was saying
about the difference between,
we wanna really sell the point that PyScript is a platform.
We're currently working on plugins
where we want developers to actually write Python code
to add custom elements to the DOM as well, right?
And not use any JavaScript.
I hope we can get it in this next release,
but for sure before the end of the year,
we are allowing that.
And it's gonna be a huge improvement
in what people can do with PyScript
and actually how can people extend the platform
creating new frameworks.
- So are you envisioning or are you at least aiming for,
if not fully envisioning something like PyView or PyReact
or like some of these traditional front-end frameworks,
but a Python equivalent.
- Nicholas.
- That's a loaded question.
I think, I think--
- PyAngular?
No, just kidding.
- Pangular.
I think that it makes a great story if you're a journalist that Python's going to come up and eat JavaScript's
Lunch in the browser. that's a false dichotomy
That's a that's a great way of getting clickbait and things if you want to write
um
you know app
Uh web-based app stuff and you're familiar with javascript and react, you know
Just use the tools that you're that they empower you to write the stuff that you want
But for the quartet of us in this conversation, we're all python easters. We we all
Appreciate the aesthetic of that language in the way it works. and so, uh
I would go back to the difference between a platform and a framework
um
Our point from earlier on which is it's going to be fun to trust the community our remarkable community
And see what interesting things what itches that they scratch
Um so that they create fun stuff and feedback to us ways in which we can improve
The pi script offering because this is a story that's going to keep going. you know software is never finished
um
but
I think that
um
One thing I hope and if i'm honest with you, this is really why I joined anaconda was to help
Think about these things exactly the question that you've just asked michael, you know
What about all of these kind of things of building apps with python in the browser?
um
well
What I found is that I need to dig a bit lower to do some
More call pi scripty things and then dig a bit lower to look at perhaps
What the runtimes are doing and blah and here I am messing around with with micropython now
But hopefully I want to sort of surface as it were and get back to what I thought I was going to be doing
Which is thinking about these sorts of things and what I really hope to do
But what I really hope to see from the python community as well is engagement in
Frameworks that
Will empower people and i'm thinking of the educational sphere as well here because let's face it
I don't know if you've ever faced 30 teenagers on a friday afternoon and somebody's introduced you as
Nicholas a coder who's going to teach you about python. there's nothing more intimidating than that.
So, and let me tell you print. Hello world doesn't cut the mustard
Okay, this is not exciting for them
But if we can make I want to build this thing. I saw an unreal engine 5 in python. Exactly
Exactly exactly
But if we could make it so that they can do the equivalent of, you know, the MySpace,
"Hi Nan, I'm on the internet," and you know, within two minutes you've got a website.
You know, you've got a very quick way of getting onto a mobile phone or tablet, which,
let's face it, for today's teenagers, that's their primary computing device.
And I've been in classrooms where, you know, kids can't type.
It's not because they don't know what a keyboard is.
They use a keyboard every day, but they just use their thumbs like this with it.
And when you give them an actual mechanical keyboard,
It's just really bad.
We are dinosaurs using these keyboards now, right?
Okay, we're going to evolve massive thumbs or something,
but it's that sort of a situation, okay?
We've got to be aware of what these platforms are
that folks are using,
that may be outside of our kind of age group and usage
and help them do things with that.
You're touching on a very important part
of the PyScript vision,
and it's really not about the current Python community
or user base.
Like it actually is,
how can we democratize programming and Python and everything?
And so we really wanna be thinking about
who's not thinking about coding at all.
Like people that would love to use a programming language
as a tool for them to do things,
and they can't either because, you know,
time or because it's too complicated to get Python working or all of that.
So that's a pluggable, and I'm going to quote Peter again because we were talking and
welcome back, Nicholas. Peter at some point mentioned something like
system design with plugins from the beginning is kind of indication of the developers not
really knowing what they're doing or not really knowing what it should do, which sometimes
is a negative connotation.
But for PyScript, it's definitely intentional because we want the community to be able to
create their own things.
And it's really greenfield.
So I don't know what they're going to be doing.
I want to allow them to do crazy things and surprises.
DjangoCon, Patrick came up with this experiment of running Django on either PyScript or PyDi.
And my first question was, why? Right? But then, who cares? Like, I don't need to know why.
>> The web is inside the web. >> Exactly.
So that's the whole point.
I can we want to make it money,
accessible and a hacker hackerspace.
A safe hackerspace.
Yeah, it's such awesome.
Or congratulations you guys on on this.
When will we see something that we
outside that don't want to grab onto
an in flight open source project,
but like a release equivalent of this?
Is there some some time frame some
thought about when that's out?
Niklas, this is the right time to drop from the call.
Okay, so I can certainly tell you what the state of play is right now and you can extrapolate when
you may see sort of things like MicroPython. So because PyScript, proper PyScript,
is undergoing active development, I didn't want to try and plug in new run times, new interpreters,
was whilst the sand underneath me was shifting, as it were.
So I created a very small and simple test harness
version of PyScript that I've called,
surprisingly enough, MicroPyScript.
That is going to be thrown away.
Its sole purpose was to allow me to just poke these things
with a stick and see what happens.
And I'm still using that to, for instance,
figure out how we can do MicroPython DOM
connectivity and interactions as well.
That's literally what I've been doing all day today,
is reading articles that I needed to do to make that happen.
- That's awesome.
That's what we've talked so much.
Once the DOM is in play, then all of a sudden it's on.
- Everything else is, yes, exactly, exactly.
Once that's in place, what I imagine will happen
is Nicholas is gonna be spending a lot of time
with the main code base and pairing with people
Know it a lot better than I currently do because it's been maybe a couple of months since i've last looked at it
Um, and it's changed a lot since then and we'll integrate that work
So I I expect and this is a finger in the air and remember i'm in it
You know, the right answer is when it's ready, but I imagine it's going to be kind of springtime
uh
time, uh first third of you say maybe in april like i'm not gonna mention any day
- 2020. - 2020.
- 2020, I'm like, oh. - 'Cause you're just
gonna hold me to it, aren't you?
(laughing)
I'm not gonna mention any date.
- I'm just teasing you, I'm not holding you to that.
- I hear that, you know, conferenceware is very real,
so we can promise for PyCon, no problem.
- Yeah, I hear a good place to announce
new JavaScript packages is Salt Lake City in April.
So, Brett, I'm gonna give you the final word here,
maybe to like put one more thought into this
before we wrap up our show.
- Nicholas talked about, and Fabio also talked about,
like how do we, you know,
this could be an empowering thing for other people, right?
Like if for kids in education and whatnot,
if you look at a lot of education is Chromebooks,
you know what runs great on Chromebooks?
The web.
Also VS Code in the browser.
Like there's, is there some thought of like interesting
pure web development environments, runtime environments,
like end to end things that could be done.
- We actually announced that for VS Code in our last release.
If you go read our release notes,
we actually have an extension that will load up
into vscode.dev, which is an actual website,
not the name of a product.
You literally go to vscode.dev,
it'll load up VS Code in the browser.
And there's a Python extension by my teammate Dirk
that uses Wazzy and the CPython build,
where you have a REPL,
you can run code from your workspace,
wherever it's loaded, right?
It doesn't have to be on disk.
It can come from GitHub,
anywhere VS Code can read files from.
It can load and be seen by Python interpreter itself.
So that's all working.
And just this past week, it's not out yet, to be very clear,
Dirk got debugging working using Wazzy
and a very cool trick that everyone can,
it's very Unix-y.
Well, I don't want to spoil it.
It's going to be open source,
so it's not a trade secret or anything,
It's way easier to read about it than try to explain it on a podcast,
but we got debugging working as well.
So we are trying to work towards a complete development story
such that, once again, for beginners, for learners, for the education market,
to at least have a baseline Python experience
where you can write code, read code, read files, debug,
like what you would want to have when you're facing down
that classroom of 30 kids that Nicholas has shown is very scary
to at least have something you can have them all just pull up.
I do want to add two other things to this, though,
is actually kind of call to actions for the community around all this.
One is I don't think we've all started to think about the opportunities here
beyond what we've talked about.
There's more to this than just what we have in the browser.
And it's one of these rising ties lifts all shifts.
so it's not that I want to take away from what Price Script's done,
all this wonderful stuff in the browser,
but I think if we can get more WebAssembly stuff kind of going,
it helps cause everyone to try to look into this more,
which will lead to more Price Script engagement.
So I think there's some use cases we haven't really tackled yet in the community,
where if you just stop and look about where's things really oriented towards JavaScript as a platform,
and go like, "Oh, you know what? We might be able to use Python here now."
For instance, you could probably, and I haven't had time to test this,
but I see zero reason why this couldn't work.
You could probably start writing GitHub Actions in Python now.
Because guess what? It runs on Node, and Node can run WebAssembly.
So we could totally take either Nicholas's MicroPython build,
or we could take the CPython build,
and totally just have as part of a GitHub Action,
as the first step in the JavaScript, load Python,
and then suddenly just say, "Call this function,"
and then suddenly all your stuff's going through Python.
Because guess what? At that point, GitHub Actions is all totally driven
and some special formatting in it.
So you could totally just do that.
And I think Nicholas wants to interject.
Yeah, it's worth pointing out that Damien,
who has done a lot of work on getting
MicroPython to work with Wasm,
because clearly he knows the code base
and things like that.
MicroPython, if you look very carefully
at the WebAssembly port,
you'll notice that
there are conditionals that check
whether it's running in Node
or in a browser.
Browsers, so go knock yourself out. Try that. I've not tried it.
I've clearly been busy doing other things but folks might want to have a go, uh at using I mean
I feel like we should award a prize or something you you you you win a thumbs up or something like that if you can
Get a github action running micro python
The other call. yeah, I mean that's fantastic, right? Like I I think there's opportunities here
We just haven't even touched yet that the community can totally just lean into that
that we haven't had opportunity to be able to do before.
The other thing I want to lean into here
that we've talked about languages
versus platforms and all this,
the one key thing across all of this story
is Python the language.
So this is going to sound a little weird,
but I want to push people to write more Python code.
And the reason I phrase it this way is we've historically
as a community done great about this,
but we will reach for that Rust code
or that C code or whatever
to write that little bit a little faster.
But when you do that, well, right now, Fabio and Nicholas
shed a tear because that makes it that much harder
to make that run in PyScript, right?
And same for anyone else who wants to do
this WebAssembly thing, right?
Anytime you write anything in something other than Python,
it's harder to get running, right, somewhere else.
Now, you mentioned the 3.11 release, Michael.
My hope here is now that we've got
that nice little performance boost there,
that's going to motivate people
who are primarily trying to see Python at the moment
to write more code in Python and reach for the C code
the rest code less because once again,
that stuff can get brought over today.
There is nothing you have to do to make this work.
You can load pure Python wheels in PyScript.
You can do that on WebAssembly.
It just runs.
We can nudge the community back towards running more Python and
leaning less on the accelerator code that
we have historically written for these platforms or do both.
If you can at least prototype in Python and keep that running,
and then write the accelerator code behind the scenes.
You can have multiple wheels, including a pure Python wheel.
Right? Like coverage.py, we all know, does this exact thing,
so it works no matter where you are.
Same thing for this case, right?
Like, if you can get the pure Python wheel out there,
then it's going to be usable everywhere.
And so that's kind of a baseline target.
I hope the community kind of leans into more than we have
in the last few years,
where, yeah, write your Python code even more than you may have before,
because it's usable in more places.
That's the really great advice.
And it's not done getting faster, right? The faster CPython
team is still making a bunch of steps. So it's much faster now, but there's
still 3.11, 3.13, or 3.12, 3.13, so on.
Yeah, exactly. It's going to keep going. I don't know how much faster
3.12 may or may not be. I think there's some plans for 3.12 that are
really foundational. So the bump might not be quite as big as 3.11, but
3.13, if the foundation lays in 3.12, we'll hopefully get the bump.
So yeah, it's hopeful you'll keep getting those wins going forward, right?
And I know Damien's still working on mycopython to make it faster and smaller
and better and all that stuff.
So it's not just a CPython thing either.
Like the whole, everyone's always trying to make Python run better on all these
platforms. So key thing though, is the common,
the common bottom layer of all these platforms is actually Python itself.
So if we can target that more as a community,
will actually be able to get more use out of the code
and for what people have produced in more places.
And once again, help Nicholas when he faces down that class of 30.
[LAUGHTER]
Yes, you can create call of duty. Okay.
Thank you, Brett. That's great thoughts.
And it also points out I should pay more attention to those release notes
when they come up in my VS Code.
I'm like, "Oh, new one. Out of the way. Maybe I'll read them."
[LAUGHTER]
All right, you guys, thank you so much
for all the work on this.
This is super exciting.
And yeah, I'm looking forward to hearing about it in spring
or whenever it's ready.
Brett, Fabio, Nicholas, thanks for being here.
It's been great.
- Thanks, Michael.
- Thank you, Michael.
It was great. - Thank you, Michael.
- Yeah, you bet, bye all.
Thanks everyone for listening.
[BLANK_AUDIO]